---
sidebar_position: 6
---

import ExampleCode from '@site/src/components/ExampleCode';

# `routes` â€” Route Messages

<!--<ExampleCode path="storeExample.ts" numbered metastring="{5,8-16,21}" />-->

"Routing" is the term used for outbound processing of messages in Gofer Engine.
You can develop channel routes in either the JSON config route following the
`Route` type, or you can use the OOP style and follow the `ORoute` interface.

## Using JSON Style

_Alternatively [use OOP style](#using-oop-style)._

Using object configs offer simplified strongly typed configuration and allows the configs to be easily stringified to JSON and broken apart for exporting/importing.

The `routes` property in the `ChannelConfig` type takes a multidimensional
arrays of `Route`s. This allows routes to be procecessed syncronously or
asyncronously. Routes within the same inner array will be called sequentially,
If a route sends to a tcp server, then the next route will be using the ACK
returned by that server.

<ExampleCode path="configRouteExample.ts" numbered metastring="{3-10,12-15,17-23,51}" />


## Using OOP Style

_Alternatively [use JSON style](#using-json-style)._

### `name`

Call the `name` method to name the route

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={7} end={7} numbered={false} />

### `id`

Call the id method to override the generated id given to the route. If not
provided the id will be a UUID

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={8} end={8} numbered={false} />

### `filter`

Call the filter method to filter the message. See Filter Flow for the function
definition

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={9} end={9} numbered={false} />

### `transform`

Call the transform method to transform/modify the message. See Transform Flow
for the function definition

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={10} end={10} numbered={false} />

### `store`

Call the store method to persist the message to a data store. See Store Config
for the config definition

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={11} end={11} numbered={false} />

### `setVar`

Call the setVar method to set a variable value for the specific scope. The
varValue can either be the value itself or a function to callback to retrieve
the value from the message and context. See Variables for more information on
using variables.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={12} end={14} numbered={false} />

### `setMsgVar`
Call the setMsgVar method to set a variable value for the Message scope. Later
in this message will be able to use this variable. The varValue can either be
the value itself or a function to callback to retrieve the value from the
message and context. See Variables for more information on using variables.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={15} end={15} numbered={false} />

### `setRouteVar`
Call the setMsgVar method to set a variable value for the Message scope. Later
in this message will be able to use this variable. The varValue can either be
the value itself or a function to callback to retrieve the value from the
message and context. See Variables for more information on using variables.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={16} end={16} numbered={false} />

### `setChannelVar`

Call the setChannelVar method to set a variable value for the Channel scope.
Later in this message or following messages within this same channel will be
able to use this variable. The varValue can either be the value itself or a
function to callback to retrieve the value from the message and context. See
Variables for more information on using variables.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={17} end={17} numbered={false} />

### `setGlobalVar`

Call the setGlobalVar method to set a variable value for the Global scope.
Anywhere later in current or following messages within this same server will be
able to use this variable. The varValue can either be the value itself or a
function to callback to retrieve the value from the message and context. See
Variables for more information on using variables.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={18} end={18} numbered={false} />

### `getVar`

Call the getVar method to get a previously set variable for the given scope by
name. Define the callback function (cb) to do something with the value of the
variable. You can use the value to filter or transform the message, or do
something with the MessageContext.

To filter the message, return a boolean.

To transform the message, return the transformed Msg class instance You can
return undefined or even not return anything (void)

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={19} end={19} numbered={false} />

### `getMsgVar`

Call the getMsgVar method to get a previously set variable for the Msg scope.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={20} end={20} numbered={false} />

### getRouteVar

Call the getRouteVar method to get a previously set variable for the Route
scope.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={21} end={23} numbered={false} />

### `getChannelVar`

Call the getChannelVar method to get a previously set variable for the Channel
scope.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={24} end={26} numbered={false} />

### `getGlobalVar`
Call the getGlobalVar method to get a previously set variable for the Channel scope

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={27} end={29} numbered={false} />

### `send`
Call the send method to configure a destination to send the message.

Currently only TCP (MLLP), HTTP, and HTTPS destinations are supported, but
coming soon, Gofer Engine will also support ftp, sftp, and database direct
queries/mutations.

For example, you can send the message via TCP to the IP and port provided by
your EHR

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={30} end={30} numbered={false} />

You can also use a function to extract this information from the message or
context

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={31} end={36} numbered={false} />

Another example, you can send the message to an HTTPS endpoint with a
self-signed certificate, and provide basic authorization.

<ExampleCode path="oopRoutingExample.ts" start={42} end={50} numbered={false} />


### `export`

Call the export method to save the configuration to a JSON object. This method
is mainly used for testing purposes and inner implementation.

## Simplified types

```ts
type Route = {
  kind: 'route';
  id?: string | number;
  name?: string;
  tags?: Tag[];
  queue?: QueueConfig;
  flows:
    | SetRequired<RouteFlowNamed, 'id'>[]
    | (RouteFlow | RouteFlowNamed)[];
}

type RouteFlow =
  | FilterFlow
  | TransformFlow
  | TransformOrFilterFlow
  | ({ kind: "store" } & StoreConfig)
  | Connection;

type Connection =
  | { kind: "tcp"; tcp: TcpConfig }
  | { kind: "http"; http: HTTPConfig }
  | { kind: "https"; https: HTTPSConfig };

type RouteFlowNamed = {
  kind: "flow";
  id?: string | number; // a unique id for this route flow. If not provided will use UUID to generate. if not defined it may not be the same between deployments/reboots
  name?: string; // a human readable name for this route flow. Preferrably unique
  tags?: Tag[]; // Tags to help organize/identify route flows
  queue?: QueueConfig;
  flow: RouteFlow;
};

interface ORoute {
  name: (name: string) => ORoute;
  id: (id: string | number) => ORoute;
  filter: (f: FilterFunc) => ORoute;
  transform: (t: TransformFunc) => ORoute;
  store: (s: StoreConfig) => ORoute;
  setVar: <V>(scope: varTypes, varName: string, varValue: MsgVar<V>) => ORoute;
  setMsgVar: <V>(varName: string, varValue: MsgVar<V>) => ORoute;
  setRouteVar: <V>(varname: string, varValue: MsgVar<V>) => ORoute;
  setChannelVar: <V>(varName: string, varValue: MsgVar<V>) => ORoute;
  setGlobalVar: <V>(varName: string, varValue: MsgVar<V>) => ORoute;
  getVar: <V>(scope: varTypes, varName: string, getVal: WithVarDo<V>) => ORoute;
  getMsgVar: <V>(varName: string, getVal: WithValDo<V>) => ORoute;
  getRouteVar: <V>(varName: string, getVal: WithValDo<V>) => ORoute;
  getChannelVar: <V>(varName: string, getVal: WithValDo<V>) => ORoute;
  getGlobalVar: <V>(varName: string, getVal: WithValDo<V>) => ORoute;
  send(method: 'tcp', host: string, port: number): ORoute;
  send(method: 'http', options: IHTTPConfig): ORoute;
  send(method: 'https', options: IHTTPSConfig): ORoute;
  export: () => SetRequired<Route, "id" | "flows">;
}
```

## Advanced Config Style Conformance

For advanced type control, you can pass through generics to the `Route`,
`RouteFlow`, and `RouteFlowNamed` typed.

1. The first generic seen in source as `Filt` controls the type of the filter
   style to either (`F`) Functional configs, (`O`) Ojectified configs, or (`B`) to
   allow Both config styles.
2. The second generic seen in source as `Tran` controls the type of the
   transformer style to either (`F`) Functional configs, (`O`) Ojectified configs,
   or (`B`) to allow Both config styles.
3. The third generic seen in source as `Stct` controls controls the strictness of
   the configs to either (`S`) Strictly require objectified configs with ids, or
   (`L`) then allow looser config without requirind ids.

