---
sidebar_position: 1
---

import ExampleCode from '@site/src/components/ExampleCode';

# Event System

Gofer Engine's Event System's library package has been named `handelse`.

:::info

_**HÃ¤ndelse**_ is the Swedish word for event.

:::

This library is designed to be used as a
standalone event system library package if so desired.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,68,'// ...']]} />

The default export of the library is an initialized class of the `EventSystemManager`. Since this is the default import, you can shorten the name to your liking:

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,68,'// ...']]} replacers={[['eventSystemManager','handelse']]} />

If instead you wish to initialize or extend the `EventSystemManager` class yourself, you can import just the class and initialize your own manager.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,68,'const manager = new EventSystemManager(["custom-reserved-handler"]);\n\n// ...']]} replacers={[['eventSystemManager','{ EventSystemManager }']]} />

## Global vs. Local Handlers

The handelse library provides both named global event handlers, and unnamed
local event handlers. Named global event handlers can be later retrieved outside
of the current scope while local event handlers only live within their current
scope.

### Create a Local Handler

To create a local event handler, use the `createLocal` method:

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,31,'// ...\n'],[6,40,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively you can use these aliases for the `createLocal` method: `local`,
`createInstance`, `instance`.

:::

### Create a Global Handler

To create a global event handler, use the `createGlobal` method:

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[5,68,'// ...'],]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively you can use these aliases for the `createGlobal` method: `create`,
`global`.

:::

### Get a Global Handler

Global Event Handlers can be later retrieved by their referenced handle.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,12,'// ...'],[9,59,'// ...']]} />

:::tip

For many use cases, it will be uneccessary to retrieve the handler to perform
routine tasks such as publishing or subscribing to an event handler as these
actions can be performed from the `eventSystemManager` class by passing the
handler name.

:::

:::note

As local event handlers are not referencable by name within the manager after
creation, the `get`, `sub`, `pub`, `unsub` and `delete` methods only support
global event handlers. See **[The Event System
Manager](#the-event-system-manager)**.

:::

## Event Handling

After creating either a local or global event handler, you can use the handler
the following ways:

### Subscribing

The `sub` methos allows adding a subscriber to an event handler. A subscriber is
simply a promisable function that returns a boolean. If the subscriber
successfully handled the event, then the return should be true. If the
subscriber rejected the event, then the return should be false.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,32,'// ...'],[8,37,'// ...']]} />

The return of the `sub` method returns the subscriber id. This id can be later
used to [unsubscribe](#unsubscribing) this particular subscription.

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any one of these aliases for the `sub` method:
`subscribe`, `on`, `do`, `start`, or `listen`.

:::

### Publishing

The `pub` method provides the ability to publish an event to all subscribers.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,37,'// ...'],[5,32,'// ...']]} />

The `pub` method returns a promise object, mapping each subscriber's id to it's
acceptance of the event.

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any one of these aliases for the `pub`
method: `publish`, `go`, `emit`, `broadcast`, or `signal`

:::

### Unsubscribing

The `unsub` method allows for active subscribers to be removed from the current
handler. The input requires the subscriber identifier which is returned when
adding the subscriber. See [Subscribing](#subscribing)

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,39,'// ...'],[5,30,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any of of these aliases for the `unsub` method:
`unsubscribe`, `off`, `remove`, `stop`, or `deafen`

:::

You can bulk unsubscribe all subscribers using the `removeAll` method.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,25,'// ...\n'],[3,44,'\n// ...']]} />

## The Event System Manager

Aside from [creating event handlers](#global-vs-local-handlers), the Event
System Manager provided methods for directly interacting with global event
handlers.

### Global Subscribing

The `sub` method works identical to the [`sub` method of the event handler
class](#subscribing), with the addition of the handler name as the first
argument.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,3,'// ...'],[10,68,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any one of these aliases for the `sub` method:
`subscribe`, `on`, `do`, `start`, or `listen`.

:::

### Global Publishing

The `pub` method works identical to the [`pub` method of the event handler
class](#publishing), with the addition of the handler name as the first
argument.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,8,'// ...'],[7,63,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any one of these aliases for the `pub`
method: `publish`, `go`, `emit`, `broadcast`, or `signal`

:::

### Global Unsubscribing

The `unsub` method works identical to the [`unsub` method of the event handler
class](#unsubscribing), with the addition of the handler name as the first
argument.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[3,10,'// ...'],[7,61,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Aliases]

Alternatively, you could use any of of these aliases for the `unsub` method:
`unsubscribe`, `off`, `remove`, `stop`, or `deafen`

:::

You can bulk unsubscribe all subscribers using the `removeAllSubs` method. This
method works similar to the `removeAll` method of the handler class

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,26,'// ...\n'],[4,43,'// ...']]} />

### Deleting Handlers

The `delete` method provides the capability for removing Global Event Handlers.

:::note

Local Event Handlers do not have a `delete` method as they naturally live within
their scope and are natively garbage collected by the environment. Global Event
Handlers live forever within the scope of the running process. So when they are
no longer being used, it would be wise to delete the global event handlers to
allow native garbage  collection processes.

:::

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,27,'// ...'],[5,42,'// ...']]} />

The manager also provides the `clear` method for removing _**all**_ global event handlers.

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,66,'// ...']]} />

:::warning

You cannot delete the reserved `_ALL_` global event handler. When clearning all
global event handlers using the `clear()` method, the reserved `_ALL_` event
handler will be reattached.

:::

## Typing Event Handlers

If you are using TypeScript in your project, which we highly recommend, then you
can pass in generic types to validate event types upon compiling. These generics
are available to use when creating local or global event handlers, and can be
used to strongly type global handlers retrived using the `get` method.

:::tip[Runtime Typing]

TypeScript typing can only be used while compiling and not during runtime. For
this purpose, we have included the `eventType` option parameter to help do basic
type checking during runtime using the `typeof` syntax. This will throw errors
during runtime if the `typeof event` does not match the `options.eventType` if
it is not `undefined`.

You can do additional type checking in your subscriber functions and rejecting
malformed data. This `eventType` option runs the check before hitting
subscribers.

:::

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,43,'// ...\n'],[17,26,'// ...']]} />

:::danger

If you manually coerce typescript types in your publisher, then your subscribers may receive events of an unexpected type. _It is recommended to add additional **sanitization** and data **validation** processes before sending data to systems susceptable to injection vulnerabilities._

:::


## Advanced Options

With the available options object, you can do the following advanced workflows:

- Subscribe to Global Event Handlers not already existing with the
  `createIfNotExists` option set to `true`
- Publish to Global Event Handlers not already existing with the
  `createIfNotExists` option set to `true`
- Prevent errors of creating Global Event Handlers already created with the `getIfAlreadyCreated` option set to `true`

<ExampleCode path="eventsExample.ts" hide={[[1,59,'// ...\n'],[10,10,'// ...']]} />

:::tip[Unique Handlers]

Remember that global handlers should be globally unique within the running process. It might be beneficial to use a custom prefix for handlers that you manage if your are using handelse as a library within your application. In Gofer Engine, we prefix most global handlers with `gofer:` and within channel contexts include the channel id as well.

:::

## The `_ALL_` Event Handler

Handelse creates a global handler named `_ALL_` that cannot be removed or
published to directly. This handler is automatically subscribed to all other
event handlers. This allows you to listen globally to all events. The Event
System Manager provides the method `subAll` and aliases `all`, `subscribeAll`,
`onAll`, `doAll`, `startAll`, or `listenAll` to add subscriber functions to this
`_ALL_` global event handler.

This reserved handler can be used like any other global event handler with the
exception of being able to directly publish to this handler.

## Gofer Engine `LOGGER` Handle

Gofer Engine adds an additional global handler named `LOGGER`. Subscribing to
this event handler, you can setup a custom log receiver in additional to or
instead of the default `console.log` handler.

See [Logging](./logging) for more information.



